---
layout: post
title: "Lab 24: Twitter"
categories: lab
date: 0000-06-17
---

## Main Event


### <a name="display"></a>1. Display tweets
Display all of the tweets currently in the database as an HTML
table. How you order the columns is up to you. You should display all
information related to a tweet.


### <a name="tweet"></a>2. Tweet!
Above your table, display a form consisting of three elements:

1. an input box where a user will enter their user name;

2. an input box where a user will enter their tweet; and

3. a submit button.

The form should POST the information back to the page.

```html
<form method="POST" action="/">
```


### <a name="filter"></a>3. Tweet filters
Beneath your tweet form, but still above the tweet display table,
build another form. This form will allow you to filter tweets by a
given user, and to control the number of tweets displayed. The form
should contain the the following three elements:

1. A selection menu (HTML
   [option](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/tag_option.asp)) containing
   all unique Twitter users in the database, in ascending order. The
   first user listed should be a special user that is not in the
   database. Selection of that user should signify that no user
   filtration should take place.

2. A text box in which the user can enter the number of tweets they
   would like to display.
    
3. A submit button.

Unlike the previous form, this form should be submitted using as a GET
request.

```html
<form method="GET" action="/">
```

### <a name="likes"></a>4. Like!
Retool the ID column to allow the user to "like" that particular
tweet.

1. Remove the table heading for ID. You can replace the heading with
   "Like," or just leave it empty.

2. Instead of displaying the tweets ID, display the word "like." That
   word should actually be a link back to the page itself defining a
   query string that informs the page to increment the number of likes
   for that tweet ID. Thus, although this column no longer displays
   the ID, it still depends on it.

   If you are confused, recall the counter example we did in class in
   which the anchor tag was used to increment a counter.

