---
layout: post
title: "Lab 22: Web programming"
categories: lab
date: 0000-06-03
---

## Main Event


### <a name="html"></a>1. Static HTML
Complete the following tasks using static-HTML. There is no
requirement to use Python/Flask to complete this.

* Write a page containing five links to five of your favorite
  websites.

* Build a 3-by-3 table, where each cell contains a number from one
  through nine.


### <a name="flsk"></a>2. Dynamic HTML
The remaining exercises require that you are running a web server
capable of executing Python code. One of the most straight forward
frameworks is [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org):

```bash
$> conda install flask
```

Flask's [quickstart](http://flask.pocoo.org/docs/0.12/quickstart/) is
a good place to get a high-level understanding of the framework.


### <a name="webtime"></a>3. Current time
Build a page that displays the current time. The Python
[datetime](https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html) module can
help with this:

```python
import datetime

i = datetime.datetime.now()

print('Current year', i.year)
print('Current month', i.month)
print('Current date (day)', i.day)
print('dd/mm/yyyy format', i.day, i.month, i.year)
print('Current hour', i.hour)
print('Current minute', i.minute)
print('Current second', i.second)
print('hh:mm:ss format', i.hour, i.month, i.second)
```

These are just examples so that you get the idea. If you would like to
experiment with these commands, it's probably best if you do it in a
Python interpreter first, then move the commands over to your
web-enabled Python script. You are free to print the date in any
manner you wish.


### <a name="webcal"></a>4. Current calendar
Build a page that displays the month as a table. The current day
should be highlighted by making the cell a different color:

```html
<td bgcolor="yellow">Yellow cell!</td>
```

A month can be thought of as a matrix with seven columns and a
variable number of rows, depending on the month. Thus, building a
calendar is essentially just a nested for-loop.

Along with
[datetime](https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html), the
[calendar](https://docs.python.org/3/library/calendar.html) module is
useful here; as an example:

```python
import datetime
import calendar

i = datetime.datetime.now()
c = calendar.monthrange(i.year, i.month)

print(i.month, 'starts on day', c[0])
print(i.month, 'has', c[1], 'days')
```

It is probably easiest to start your calendar from Monday. If you are
up for the challenge, make a UAE calendar by making the first day
Saturday.


### <a name="multiplication"></a>5. Multiplication table
Build a 10-by-10 multiplication table. The upper-most row and
left-most column should be the numbers to be multiplied. The
corresponding cell should be the result of that multiplication.


### <a name="formatter"></a>6. ASCII to HTML
Develop a web page that reads in the file
[list.txt]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/lab-22/list.txt) and displays it in
nicely formatted HTML. There are two things you must take into
account:

1. HTML does not care about ASCII new lines. The `<br>` tag is what it
   looks for.

2. The ASCII file contains lists, with each bullet denoted with a
   space-''o''-space combination; so

   ```
   o Item 1
   o Item 2
   o Item 3
   ```

   would be the list in text format. HTML has its own version of
   [bulleted lists](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_lists.asp), to
   which the text version needs to be converted.

